Home » Vegan Cheese

VEGAN MOZZARELLA (STRETCHY, MELTY)
Published: Jul 13, 2020 Updated: Nov 10, 2021 by Alison Andrews This post may contain affiliate links

 Jump to Recipe  Jump to Video  Print Recipe
Stretchy melty and so cheesy you won’t believe you made it yourself vegan mozzarella! Super easy, divine on pizza and grilled cheese sandwiches!

Vegan Mozzarella melted on top of a pizza with fresh basil leaves. 
This vegan mozzarella is divine! It’s stretchy, melty and perfect on your vegan pizza. And when you want a grilled cheese sandwich with some delicious tomato soup, this mozzarella will be your best friend. 

It’s also so easy to make you will hardly believe it.

And all you need is some easy ingredients like cashews, lemon juice, garlic powder, maple syrup, nutritional yeast, agar agar powder, tapioca starch, tahini and coconut oil!

Okay, granted, agar agar powder isn’t your ‘average’ ingredient, but it’s a must when it comes to making your own vegan cheese (and making some vegan jello too!) so from now on, keep it as a pantry staple.

Tapioca starch provides all that stretchiness that you must have with mozzarella, and that’s an easy ingredient to get hold of.

Vegan Mozzarella on parchment paper. Cashews and lemons in the background.  
HOW TO MAKE VEGAN MOZZARELLA
You will find full instructions and measurements in the recipe card at the bottom of the post. This is a summary of the process to go along with the process photos.

To make this vegan mozzarella you simply blend up all your ingredients in your blender, and then pour that out into a saucepan and bring to the boil, stirring constantly.
Once it’s bubbling on the sides, keep stirring for a full 2 minutes. Then remove from the heat and pour out into ramekins.
Refrigerate for an hour to set.
Now you have vegan mozzarella that is ready to use!
Step by step process photo collage of making vegan mozzarella.  
RECIPE TIPS
You can pop your mozzarella out of the ramekins and break it up into balls or you can leave it in the ramekins and use an ice cream scoop to scoop out perfect balls of mozzarella. The longer you leave the mozzarella in the fridge, the firmer it gets.

This isn’t the type of cheese you will slice, even after it’s been in the fridge a few days and firmed up a lot. It’s always going to stay a soft cheese that you will break off into mozzarella balls or spread out onto a sandwich.

There is no need to soak the cashews. You don’t need to soak the cashews first for this. I tried a version where I soaked the cashews for 15 minutes in boiling water and a version where I didn’t soak them at all. I didn’t notice any difference at all.

Considering that you blend this with a lot of water, the kind of blender that you’re using, whether it’s a strong model or a weak model, won’t have an impact here. So I don’t think there is a case for soaking the cashews first and this step can be omitted. 

WHAT KIND OF COCONUT OIL TO USE
I have made this vegan mozzarella with both extra virgin coconut oil (has all the coconut flavor) and refined coconut oil (neutral flavored) and refined coconut oil is preferable. Refined coconut oil really lets this taste like mozzarella!

Extra virgin coconut oil results in a strong coconut flavor coming through. It’s definitely not unpleasant, especially if you do like the taste of coconut, but it does interfere a bit.

Vegan Mozzarella balls on top of a pizza ready to go into the oven.  
HOW TO USE THIS VEGAN MOZZARELLA CHEESE
On a vegan pizza! The vegan pizza you see in these photos is a perfect place for it. Place balls of your mozzarella evenly on top of the pizza and bake it. The mozzarella melts beautifully on top and the flavor is next level. 
A grilled cheese sandwich is another place we tested this mozzarella and it did NOT disappoint. Place the mozzarella between two slices of buttered bread and grill until toasted and melty and delicious. 
On top of Lasagna. Well our vegan lasagna recipe is so divine it doesn’t really need any extras, but if you dollop some mozzarella balls on top of it before it bakes, well, that will just take it to the next level of cheesy deliciousness! 
Vegan Mozzarella balls nicely melted on top of a pizza fresh from the oven, with basil leaves and dried herbs on top.  
STORING AND FREEZING
Store it in the fridge (covered) where it will last for about a week. It is also freezer friendly. So if you think you won’t be able to finish it all, then freeze some of it. 

Vegan Mozzarella balls melted on top of a pizza, fresh basil leaves and dried herbs on top.  
MORE VEGAN CHEESE RECIPES
Vegan Cheddar Cheese
Vegan Cream Cheese
Vegan Cottage Cheese
Vegan Ricotta
Vegan Feta 
Vegan Camembert
A slice of pizza with melted vegan mozzarella on is lifted up.  
Did you make this recipe? Be sure to leave a comment and rating below!

Vegan mozzarella on a pizza with fresh basil leaves.
Vegan Mozzarella
Stretchy melty and so cheesy you won’t believe you made it yourself vegan mozzarella! Super easy, divine on pizza and grilled cheese sandwiches!
5 from 22 votes
 Print  Pin  Rate
Course: How To, Savory, SideCuisine: American, VeganDiet: Vegan Prep Time: 10 minutesCook Time: 10 minutesTotal Time: 20 minutes Servings: 26 Calories: 61kcal Author: Alison Andrews
Ingredients
▢½ cup Raw Cashews (75g)
▢1 Tbsp Lemon Juice freshly squeezed
▢¼ tsp Garlic Powder
▢1 tsp Maple Syrup
▢2 Tbsp Nutritional Yeast
▢1 Tbsp Agar Agar Powder
▢2 Tbsp Tapioca Starch
▢1 tsp Tahini
▢1 tsp Salt
▢⅓ cup Refined Coconut Oil (80ml)
▢1 ⅔ cups Water (400ml)